>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY FEBRUARY 28: A
DEADLINE VOTE KEEPS HOMELAND
SECURITY FUNDED FOR ONE MORE
WEEK; THE LATEST FROM MOSCOW
FOLLOWING THE ASSASSINATION OF A
LEADING RUSSIAN OPPOSITION
LEADER; AND IN OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, ONE OF THE MOST POPULAR
YOUTH SPORTS IN AMERICA NOW
FACING SCRUTINY OVER THE RISK OF
CONCUSSIONS.
>> DO WE WANT TO, IN THE NAME OF
SPORT, PUT A CHILD'S BRAIN IN
HARM'S WAY?
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS OF
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
CONGRESS MANAGED TO AVOID A
PARTIAL SHUTDOWN OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
LATE LAST NIGHT BY PASSING
LEGISLATION THAT EXTENDS FUNDING
FOR ONE MORE WEEK.
THE PRESIDENT SIGNED IT JUST
MINUTES BEFORE MIDNIGHT, WHEN
FUNDING WOULD HAVE RUN OUT.
BUT THE POLITICAL WRANGLING IS
FAR FROM OVER.
HOUSE REPUBLICANS REMAIN DEEPLY
DIVIDED.
SOME MEMBERS WON'T VOTE FOR
FUNDING LEGISLATION UNLESS IT
RESCINDS PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
IMMIGRATION REFORM PLAN.
DEMOCRATS AND MODERATE
REPUBLICANS ARE CRITICIZING THE
TACTIC.
>> IT'S THE 11th HOUR, AND WE
MUST ACT TO PROVIDE STABLE,
CONTINUOUS FUNDING FOR THE
AGENCIES AND PROGRAMS TASKED
WITH DEFENDING OUR HOME TURF.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE DETAILS
ON THE POLITICS BEHIND THIS
FUNDING FIGHT, I'M JOINED NOW
FROM WASHINGTON, D.C., BY "ROLL
CALL" REPORTER NIELS LESNIEWSKI.
SO, WHAT HAPPENED?
WHY DID WE GET THIS CLOSE AGAIN
TO ALMOST SHUTTING DOWN THE
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY?
>> WELL, THERE REALLY WAS THE
SOMEWHAT SURPRISING, I THINK,
FOR A LOT OF OBSERVERS,
SITUATION THAT DEVELOPED IN THE
HOUSE WHERE THE HOUSE WAS UNABLE
TO PASS THE THREE-WEEK STOPGAP
SPENDING BILL FOR HOMELAND
SECURITY WHICH SENT EVERYONE
SCRAMBLING WELL INTO THE EVENING
ON FRIDAY NIGHT.
WHAT IT DOES, THOUGH, IS, IT
SETS UP A TEST FOR THE COMING
WEEK, REQUIRING BASICALLY THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES TO GO
THROUGH THIS WHOLE PROCESS AGAIN
SOME TIME MONDAY OR LATER IN THE
WEEK.
AND THE QUESTION WILL BE, ONCE
AGAIN, DOES SPEAKER BOEHNER
ALLOW THE FULL-YEAR FUNDING BILL
FOR THE HOMELAND SECURITY
DEPARTMENT THAT HAS ALREADY
PASSED THE SENATE ON TO THE
FLOOR OF HIS CHAMBER, OR IS
THERE ANOTHER SORT OF STOPGAP?
AND IS THE HOMELAND SECURITY
DEPARTMENT GOING TO BE FUNDED
WEEK-TO-WEEK FOR THE FORESEEABLE
FUTURE?
>> Sreenivasan: SO, IS THERE A
RIFT NOW BETWEEN THE HOUSE AND
SENATE REPUBLICAN LEADERSHIP?
>> WELL, THERE'S A RIFT BETWEEN
MANY PEOPLE IN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES, I THINK, AND A
LOT OF REPUBLICAN SENATORS.
I DON'T KNOW TO THE EXTENT AT
WHICH IT GOES TO THE LEADERSHIP
LEVEL, BUT WE'VE HEARD ANY
NUMBER OF REPUBLICAN SENATORS
WHO ARE ON THE BALLOT IN 2016--
PARTICULARLY THOSE WHO ARE IN
STATES THAT WOULD BE MORE
INCLINED TO VOTE FOR A DEMOCRAT
FOR THE SENATE-- WHO ARE SAYING
THAT THIS FIGHT REALLY NEEDED TO
BE RESOLVED AND THEY'RE JUST
PUTTING OFF THE INEVITABLE OVER
ON THE HOUSE SIDE BY USING THESE
SHORT-TERM BILLS.
WE'VE HEARD FROM THAT SENATOR
MARK KIRK IN ILLINOIS AND
OTHERS.
>> Sreenivasan: AND SO, THIS
ALSO MOVES THE CLOCK, RIGHT, ON
WHAT OTHER PIECES OF LEGISLATION
CONGRESS CAN TRY TO TACKLE, MUCH
LESS GET APPROVED?
>> EVERY TIME THAT YOU HAVE TO
SPEND ANOTHER WEEK WRANGLING
OVER IMMIGRATION AND FUNDING
HOMELAND SECURITY DOING THE
BASIC WORK OF GOVERNMENT, THE
CLOSER THAT YOU GET TO OTHER
THINGS REACHING THEIR DEADLINES.
WE'RE ONLY ABOUT A MONTH AWAY
FROM HAVING THE RECURRING
PROBLEM OVER THE AMOUNT OF MONEY
THAT DOCTORS GET PAID FOR
TREATING PATIENTS WHO HAVE
MEDICARE BENEFITS.
AND THERE'S ALL SORTS OF OTHER
THINGS THAT ARE COMING UP, AND
SO THE LONGER YOU SPEND ON THIS
THE LESS TIME THERE IS TO
ACTUALLY ADVANCE AN AGENDA
RATHER THAN JUST PUTTING OUT
FIRES.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY, AND
BRIEFLY, DO YOU KNOW IF THE
MEMBERS OF CONGRESS ARE HEARING
FROM THEIR CONSTITUENTS ABOUT
HOW THIS BRINKSMANSHIP MAYBE
ISN'T REALLY FOR THEM?
>> WELL, THERE'S BEEN SOME SIGN
OF THAT.
THE REAL SIGN OF THAT IS GOING
TO COME ABOUT A WEEK FROM NOW
BECAUSE THE HOUSE IS SCHEDULED
TO GO OUT ON RECESS ACTUALLY IN
MID-MARCH.
THE SENATE'S GOING TO BE HERE
ALL THE WAY THROUGH THE EASTER
BREAK, BUT THE HOUSE MEMBERS ARE
ACTUALLY GOING TO BE GOING HOME
FOR A WHOLE WEEK, AND THAT COULD
BE FASCINATING TO WATCH.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT.
NIELS LESNLEWSKI FROM "ROLL
CALL" JOINING US FROM
WASHINGTON, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: IN RUSSIA, TOP
INVESTIGATORS ARE SAYING THEY
ARE LOOKING INTO "SEVERAL
POSSIBLE MOTIVES" IN THE
ASSASSINATION OF ONE OF
PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN'S MOST
VOCAL CRITICS.
55-YEAR-OLD BORIS NEMTSOV WAS
GUNNED DOWN ON A PUBLIC STREET
NEAR THE KREMLIN FRIDAY.
PUTIN'S SPOKESMAN CALLED THE
SHOOTING A "PROVOCATION" AGAINST
THE STATE.
WE'LL HAVE MORE FROM MOSCOW IN A
MOMENT.
THE TRIAL FOR THE ACCUSED
MARATHON BOMBER WILL BE HELD IN
BOSTON NEXT WEEK AFTER ALL.
DZHOKHAR TSARNAEV'S DEFENSE
ATTORNEY ARGUED THAT A BOSTON
JURY WOULD BE BIASED BY
PUBLICITY SURROUNDING THE CASE,
BUT A FEDERAL APPEALS COURT
DISAGREED.
PROSECUTORS SAY TSARNAEV AND HIS
BROTHER SET OFF TWIN EXPLOSIONS
THAT KILLED THREE PEOPLE AND
WOUNDED MORE THAN 260 OTHERS IN
2013.
HIS BROTHER, TAMERLAN, DIED IN A
SHOOTOUT WITH POLICE FOUR DAYS
LATER.
THE WHITE HOUSE IS PROPOSING
PRIVACY REFORM WHICH WOULD
EMPOWER THE FEDERAL TRADE
COMMISSION TO OVERSEE BOTH THE
TYPE OF PERSONAL INFORMATION
COMPANIES COLLECT FROM YOU, AND
HOW THEY USE YOUR DATA.
COMPANIES WOULD HAVE TO SET UP A
CODE OF CONDUCT AND SATISFY
CERTAIN REQUIREMENTS LIKE
PROVIDING CLEAR NOTICES ABOUT
HOW YOUR DATA IS COLLECTED, USED
AND SHARED.
CONSUMER PRIVACY ADVOCATES SAY,
HOWEVER, THAT LETTING COMPANIES
COME UP WITH THE CODES OF
CONDUCT IS A BAD IDEA.
THE PROPOSAL STILL NEEDS A
CONGRESSIONAL SPONSOR.
THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE IS
CONFIRMING WHAT YOU'VE PROBABLY
BEEN FEELING THIS MONTH.
THIS HAS BEEN THE COLDEST
FEBRUARY IN DECADES ACROSS THE
NORTHEAST AND MIDWEST.
NEW YORK CITY MARKED THE COLDEST
TEMPERATURES IN 81 YEARS, WITH
AVERAGE TEMPERATURES 11 DEGREES
LOWER THAN NORMAL.
DETROIT ENDURED THE COLDEST
FEBRUARY IN 140 YEARS.
DESPITE THAT, CALIFORNIA IS IN
THE MIDST OF ITS WARMEST AND
DRIEST WINTER ON RECORD.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE NOW ON
THE SHOOTING DEATH OF RUSSIAN
OPPOSITION LEADER BORIS NEMTSOV,
REPORTER ANDREW KRAMER HAS BEEN
FOLLOWING THE STORY FOR THE "NEW
YORK TIMES."
HE JOINS US VIA SKYPE FROM
MOSCOW.
SO, FOR OUR AMERICAN AUDIENCE,
WHO WAS HE?
>> HE WAS A VERY INFLUENTIAL
POLITICIAN IN THE 1990s.
A VERY DASHING, HANDSOME UP-AND-
COMER UNDER PRESIDENT BORIS
YELTSIN.
HE EMBODIED THE HOPES FOR
DEMOCRATIC REFORM IN THE POST-
SOVIET PERIOD IN RUSSIA.
HE WAS GOVERNOR OF A REGION,
THE NIZHNY NOVGOROD REGION, AND
THEN MOVED INTO NATIONAL
POLITICS.
UNDER PRESIDENT PUTIN, HE WAS IN
THE OPPOSITION, AND HE WAS PART
OF A VERY SMALL AND BELEAGUERED
COMMUNITY OF OPPONENTS OF MR.
PUTIN, SOMETIMES STANDING ON THE
STREET HOLDING SIGNS JUST WITH A
FEW PEOPLE.
>> Sreenivasan: PUT IN
PERSPECTIVE FOR US, IF YOU CAN,
HOW HE ROSE TO PROMINENCE AS A
DISSIDENT.
HE GOT CONDOLENCES FROM WORLD
LEADERS AFTER HE WAS KILLED LAST
NIGHT.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
HE WAS A VERY HIGH-PLACED
POLITICIAN UNDER PRESIDENT
YELTSIN IN THE 1990s, AND MANY
OF HIS COLLEAGUES FROM THAT TIME
WENT INTO BUSINESS OR DROPPED
OUT OF PUBLIC VIEW.
BUT HE, IN CONTRAST, DIVED INTO
OPPOSITION POLITICS, AND HE WAS
ARRESTED A NUMBER OF TIMES.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL HAD
COUNTED HIM A PRISONER OF
CONSCIENCE.
AND HE WAS VERY HIGH PROFILE,
OFTEN TRAVELED TO EUROPE AND MET
WITH WORLD LEADERS.
AND SO, IT'S NOT A SURPRISE WHEN
THIS HAPPENED, THERE IS QUITE A
BIT OF SUPPORT AND OUTPOURING OF
CONDOLENCES FOR HIS FAMILY FROM
WORLD LEADERS, INCLUDING
PRESIDENT OBAMA.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, THE QUESTION
FOR THE INVESTIGATION NOW IS,
WHO IS BEHIND THE MURDER, RIGHT?
I MEAN, THIS WAS... IT SAYS IT
LOOKS LIKE A CONTRACT HIT, BUT
WHO HAS MOTIVES TO KILL HIM?
>> Reporter: THE POLICE HAVE PUT
OUT A NUMBER OF THEORIES TODAY.
SOME OF THEM ARE NOT CONSIDERED
VERY PLAUSIBLE.
THEY HAD SAID THAT MAYBE ISLAMIC
MILITANTS WERE INVOLVED, OR THAT
THE OPPOSITION HAD ITSELF
ORGANIZED HIS MURDER AS A WAY TO
CREATE A MARTYR AND INVIGORATE
THEIR CAUSE.
MR. NEMTSOV'S OWN COLLEAGUES
HAVE POINTED THE FINGER AT THE
KREMLIN AND AT THE SECURITY
SERVICES HERE IN RUSSIA.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, WHAT DOES
THIS DO TO ANY OF THE
OPPOSITION?
IS THIS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR THEM
TO BAND TOGETHER?
>> THERE'S THE POTENTIAL FOR
THAT HAPPENING.
THE OPPOSITION IN RUSSIA HAS
BEEN VERY FRACTURED AND
MARGINALIZED.
NOW, THEY'VE AGREED TO UNITE FOR
A MEMORIAL MARCH TOMORROW IN
MOSCOW.
WE'LL SEE GOING FORWARD HOW
SIGNIFICANT THIS EVENT IS, BUT
MANY PEOPLE HERE THINK THAT IT'S
PIVOTAL.
THIS IS A GALVANIZING AND
SEARING EXPERIENCE FOR THE
OPPOSITION, AND NOW THERE IS A
RALLYING CRY TO CONTINUE TO
SUPPORT THE CAUSES THAT HE HAD
LIVED FOR.
>> Sreenivasan: WELL, HOW
CLOSELY WILL THE WEST BE
WATCHING WHAT HAPPENS NEXT?
>> VERY CLOSELY.
THIS IS BEING SEEN AS A PIVOTAL
MOMENT FOR RUSSIAN POLITICS.
SOME ARE SAYING THIS SUGGESTS A
RETURN OF FEAR TO RUSSIAN
POLITICS, EVEN OF TERROR.
THIS IS REALLY A NEW HORIZON FOR
WHAT'S HAPPENING HERE.
WE'VE HAD DISSIDENTS ARRESTED
BEFORE.
WE'VE HAD THEM GO INTO EXILE.
AND WE'VE HAD JOURNALISTS AND
HUMAN RIGHTS WORKERS OBVIOUSLY
DIE UNDER MYSTERIOUS
CIRCUMSTANCES.
BUT THIS WAS A SENIOR MEMBER OF
THE RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT IN THE
1990s, AND HE WAS SHOT VERY
THEATRICALLY RIGHT IN FRONT OF
THE KREMLIN.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
ANDREW KRAMER OF THE "NEW YORK
TIMES" JOINING US VIA SKYPE FROM
MOSCOW, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT AND A TOPIC
THAT CONTINUES TO WORRY MILLIONS
OF PARENTS ACROSS THE NATION--
THE RISK OF CONCUSSIONS TO
CHILDREN WHO PLAY SOCCER.
SOCCER HAS ALWAYS BEEN
CONSIDERED A SAFE ALTERNATIVE TO
FOOTBALL, BUT, ACCORDING TO THE
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL,
ABOUT 10,000 CHILDREN LAND IN
THE E.R. EVERY YEAR FOR SOCCER-
RELATED HEAD INJURIES.
AND NOW, A LEADING NEUROSURGEON
AND ONE OF AMERICA'S BEST-KNOWN
SOCCER STARS ARE GOING PUBLIC TO
SAY THE GAME POSES RISKS NOT
FULLY UNDERSTOOD BEFORE.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM, HIMSELF A
SOCCER DAD, HAS THIS UPDATE IN A
REPORT WE ORIGINALLY BROADCAST
IN OCTOBER.
>> ALL RIGHT, HERE, MY MAN.
WE'RE JUST GOING TO TAKE A
LITTLE LOOK AT YOUR EARS.
>> Reporter: DR. RICHARD FLYER
HAS BEEN MY FAMILY'S
PEDIATRICIAN FOR 13 YEARS, AND,
TO BE TOTALLY HONEST, I LOVE THE
GUY.
I ADMIRE HIM, AND I TRUST HIM.
BUT THREE YEARS AGO, WHEN MY SON
JACK WAS TEN, FLYER SAID
SOMETHING THAT FLOORED US.
HE TOLD JACK HE WANTED HIM TO
STOP PLAYING SOCCER COMPLETELY.
FLYER ARGUED THAT THE DOZENS AND
DOZENS OF KIDS HE'D SEEN OVER
THE YEARS WITH SERIOUS,
SOMETIMES LIFE-ALTERING
CONCUSSIONS-- SOME OF THEM FROM
HEADING THE BALL-- HAD CONVINCED
HIM THAT SOCCER ITSELF WAS NOT
SAFE.
>> WE NEED TO LOOK AT THESE
SPORTS REALISTICALLY AND SAY
"ARE THEY REALLY SOMETHING WE
WANT OUR CHILDREN TO DO?"
DO WE WANT TO, IN THE NAME OF
SPORT, PUT A CHILD'S BRAIN IN
HARM'S WAY?
>> Reporter: FLYER'S WARNING GOT
ME AND MY WIFE TORY TO TAKE A
LONG, UNCOMFORTABLE LOOK AT
WHETHER THE SPORT OUR THREE KIDS
LOVE IS SAFE.
THE BENEFITS THEY GET OUT OF THE
GAME, THOSE ARE OBVIOUS.
BUT ARE THEY WORTH THE RISKS OF
A REALLY BAD INJURY?
FOR THE LAST COUPLE OF YEARS,
WE'VE BEEN STRUGGLING WITH A
DILEMMA THAT'S FACING REALLY
MILLIONS OF PARENTS ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
>> I JUST FEEL REALLY CONFUSED
AND WORRIED AND JUST UNSURE WHAT
WE'RE SUPPOSED TO DO NOW.
>> Reporter: IT'S IMPORTANT TO
SAY WE BECAME A SOCCER FAMILY
PARTLY BY DESIGN.
OUR THREE KIDS ARE JACK, WHO'S
13, GAVIN IS 11, AND ALLY IS
NINE.
WHEN THEY WERE LITTLE, THEY
TRIED A LOT OF DIFFERENT SPORTS,
BUT WHEN IT CAME TIME TO
OFFICIALLY JOIN TEAMS, WE REALLY
STEERED THEM TO SOCCER, WHICH WE
THOUGHT WAS A "SAFE" SPORT
COMPARED TO SOMETHING LIKE
FOOTBALL.
>> DON BROWN LEFT THE GAME WITH
A CONCUSSION.
>> I THINK I KNEW ENOUGH-- AND
THIS IS NOW TEN YEARS AGO-- TO
KNOW THAT I... FOOTBALL WASN'T
REALLY AN OPTION FOR OUR KIDS.
>> Reporter: BECAUSE IT WASN'T
SAFE.
>> BECAUSE IT WAS CONSIDERED
UNSAFE.
>> Reporter: IN 2008, THAT
CONCERN WAS DRIVEN HOME BY A
HORRIBLE ACCIDENT IN OUR TOWN.
A 16 YEAR-OLD FOOTBALL PLAYER AT
MONTCLAIR HIGH SCHOOL-- HIS NAME
WAS RYNE DOUGHERTY-- DIED FROM A
BRAIN INJURY HE GOT DURING A
GAME.
THE WHOLE TOWN WAS REALLY SHAKEN
UP BY HIS DEATH.
DID WE CONSOLE OURSELVES,
THINKING, WELL, THAT COULDN'T
HAPPEN TO OUR KIDS?
I DON'T KNOW.
MAYBE.
BUT WE KEPT SIGNING THE KIDS UP,
AND THEY LOVED IT.
>> I REALLY LIKE PLAYING, HOW
THERE ARE POSITIONS BECAUSE
THERE'S, LIKE, A SPECIAL THING
THAT YOU HAVE TO DO WHEN YOU'RE
DOING IT SO YOU FEEL LIKE YOU'RE
AN IMPORTANT PART OF IT.
>> YOU GET TO MOVE AROUND A LOT
AND THAT YOU HAVE TO BE A GOOD
TEAM, NOT JUST BE COMPOSED OF
GOOD PLAYERS.
>> SOCCER IS JUST THE BEST SPORT
THERE IS, PERIOD.
>> Reporter: BUT EVERY SO OFTEN,
DR. FLYER'S CONCERNS WOULD ECHO
IN THE BACK OUR OF HEADS.
IN 2012, ONE OF JACK'S
TEAMMATES, NICK GRAHAM, WENT UP
FOR A HEADER, FELL TO THE GROUND
AND SUFFERED SUCH A SEVERE
CONCUSSION THAT HIS HEADACHES
AND DIZZINESS DIDN'T GET BETTER
FOR MONTHS.
NICK LEFT THE TEAM, AND HE
HASN'T PLAYED SINCE.
WITHIN THE LAST YEAR, AT LEAST
THREE OF JACK'S TEAMMATES
SUFFERED CONCUSSIONS.
DID THAT MAKE US THINK ABOUT
TAKING JACK, OR ANY OF OUR KIDS,
OUT OF SOCCER?
HONESTLY, IT DIDN'T.
SEEING THEM LEARN HOW IMPORTANT
HARD WORK AND DEDICATION IS,
WATCHING THEM DEAL WITH THEIR
SUCCESSES AND THEIR FAILURES, IT
ALL SEEMED WORTH IT TO US.
>> IN THIS DAY AND AGE, THERE'S
SO MANY WARNINGS, PARENTAL
WARNINGS.
IT'S NOT SAFE TO WALK TO SCHOOL,
IT'S NOT SAFE TO DRINK THAT
DRINK, IT'S NOT SAFE TO WATCH
THAT SCREEN.
THERE'S SO MANY "NOs."
AND QUITE FRANKLY, SOME OF THE
THINGS IN LIFE THAT ARE THE MOST
FUN AND ARE THE MOST REWARDING
HAVE SOME RISK INVOLVED.
AND I'M NOT ENCOURAGING MY KIDS
TO SKYDIVE.
WHAT I'M SAYING IS, SOCCER IS
FUN AND IT'S THRILLING AND IT'S
EXCITING, AND...
>> Reporter: AND IT GIVES THEM
SO MUCH.
>> ...AND IT GIVES THEM A LOT OF
PLEASURE, SO I WASN'T PREPARED
TO TAKE THAT AWAY FROM THEM.
>> Reporter: THEN CAME THE 2014
WORLD CUP, WHICH WE ALL LOVED,
BUT ALSO WHERE WE SAW SOME OF
THOSE REALLY UGLY BLOWS TO THE
HEAD.
AND THEN I READ THIS STORY ABOUT
A MOVEMENT TO TAKE HEADING OUT
OF KIDS' SOCCER BECAUSE OF
CONCERN OVER CONCUSSIONS.
I MENTIONED THIS TO A FRIEND
WHO'S SPENT HIS ENTIRE LIFE
AROUND THE GAME.
DECLAN CARNEY WAS BORN IN
IRELAND.
HE MANAGES MY SON JACK'S TEAM,
AND OUR BOYS HAVE PLAYED
TOGETHER FOR SEVERAL YEARS.
>> THERE'S NO QUESTION THAT
CONCUSSIONS NEED TO BE DEALT
WITH AND NEED TO BE TAKEN VERY
SERIOUSLY WHENEVER THEY HAPPEN.
BUT IF SOCCER, HEADING A SOCCER
BALL WAS ACTUALLY A REAL DANGER
OF SOME SORT OF BRAIN INJURY, I
THINK IT WOULD'VE EXHIBITED
ITSELF SOMEWHERE IN MEDICAL
HISTORY IN EUROPE OR IN SOUTH
AMERICA OR IN ASIA, WHERE PEOPLE
PLAY SOCCER PRETTY MUCH ALL
THEIR LIFE AND HAVE DONE FOR THE
LAST 80, 100 YEARS.
AND I DON'T THINK THE SCIENCE
SAYS IT'S THERE.
>> Reporter: I CHECKED, AND
DECLAN IS RIGHT; THERE AREN'T
ANY LARGE-SCALE, LONG TERM
STUDIES CONNECTING SOCCER TO
BRAIN INJURY AMONG THE MILLIONS
OF SOCCER PLAYERS IN EUROPE OR
SOUTH AMERICA OR ASIA.
BUT THAT ARTICLE I READ CITED
ONE SMALL AMERICAN STUDY SHOWING
THAT ADULT AMATEUR SOCCER
PLAYERS WHO HEADED THE BALL A
LOT-- BETWEEN ABOUT 900 AND
1,500 TIMES A YEAR, WHICH IS WAY
MORE THAN ANY KID I KNOW EVER
HEADS THE BALL-- THOSE PLAYERS
SHOWED ABNORMALITIES IN THEIR
BRAINS-- THEY'RE THE RED AND
YELLOW SECTIONS HERE ON THESE
SCANS-- THAT WERE VERY SIMILAR
TO WHAT YOU'D SEE IN
CONCUSSIONS.
BUT MANY OF THESE PLAYERS SAID
THEY HADN'T HAD CONCUSSIONS.
THE STUDY SUGGESTS THAT SOME
KIND OF BRAIN TRAUMA MIGHT BE
OCCURRING FROM A LOT OF HEADING
WITHOUT PLAYERS BEING AWARE IT'S
HAPPENING.
THAT ARTICLE ALSO QUOTED THIS
MAN, DR. ROBERT CANTU.
HE'S A NEUROSURGEON, HE CO-
DIRECTS A BRAIN STUDY CENTER AT
BOSTON UNIVERSITY, AND HE'S ONE
OF THE NATION'S TOP EXPERTS ON
YOUTH CONCUSSIONS.
CANTU ACKNOWLEDGES THE SCIENCE
CONNECTING SOCCER WITH BRAIN
INJURY IS LIMITED.
HE'S IN FACT CALLED FOR MUCH
MORE RESEARCH TO BE DONE.
BUT EVEN SO, HE THINKS IT'S
BETTER TO BE SAFE AND NOT ALLOW
YOUNG KIDS TO REPEATEDLY HEAD
THE BALL.
>> IF YOU TOOK HEADING OUT OF
SOCCER, IT WOULDN'T BE BEHIND
FOOTBALL IN THE INCIDENCE OF
CONCUSSION.
IT WOULDN'T EVEN BE IN THE HIGH-
RISK GROUP.
IT WOULD BE IN A LOW-RISK GROUP.
>> Reporter: CANTU TOLD ME THAT
HEADERS, AS WELL AS THE
COLLISIONS AND THE HARD FALLS TO
THE GROUND THAT OFTEN ACCOMPANY
THEM, ARE PROBLEMATIC FOR KIDS
BECAUSE, UNLIKE ADULT BRAINS,
KIDS' BRAINS ARE STILL
DEVELOPING.
>> THE YOUNG BRAIN IS LARGELY
NOT MYELINATED.
MYELIN IS THE COATING OF NERVE
FIBERS THAT CONNECT NERVE CELLS.
AND SO, WHEN YOU VIOLENTLY SHAKE
THE YOUNG BRAIN, YOU HAVE A MUCH
GREATER CHANCE TO DISRUPT NERVE
FIBERS AND THEIR CONNECTIONS
THAN YOU DO AN ADULT BRAIN.
>> Reporter: CANTU SAYS
STRENGTHENING A KID'S NECK
MUSCLES CAN HELP, BUT THOSE
SOCCER HELMETS AND HEADGEAR THAT
HAVE BECOME POPULAR DON'T REALLY
OFFER MUCH PROTECTION, SO HE
SAYS THERE'S ONLY ONE THING LEFT
TO DO.
>> TAKE THE MOST INJURIOUS
ACTIVITY FOR HEAD INJURY OUT OF
IT, BUT LET THE REST OF THE
SPORT GO ON.
AND THAT'S PLAYING SOCCER
WITHOUT HEADING.
>> Reporter: SOME OTHERS WHO
KNOW FAR MORE ABOUT THE GAME
THAN I DO ARE ALSO LISTENING TO
CANTU, ONE OF WHOM YOU MIGHT
RECOGNIZE.
BRANDI CHASTAIN'S DRAMATIC
PENALTY SHOT AGAINST CHINA WON
THE 1999 WORLD CUP FOR THE U.S.
SHE ALSO HELPED WIN GOLD FOR THE
U.S. AT TWO DIFFERENT OLYMPICS.
SHE NOW LIVES IN NORTHERN
CALIFORNIA WITH HER HUSBAND AND
HER EIGHT-YEAR-OLD SON JADEN.
SHE COACHES HIS TEAM AND HELPS
COACH A DIVISION ONE TEAM AT
SANTA CLARA UNIVERSITY.
SHE, ALONG WITH SEVERAL OF HER
FORMER TEAMMATES FROM THE U.S.
NATIONAL TEAM, HAVE NOW JOINED
FORCES WITH DR. CANTU'S
ORGANIZATION.
>> WE DON'T NEED TO HAVE HEADING
IN YOUTH SOCCER, 14 AND YOUNGER.
>> Reporter: THE INTERESTING
THING IS, JUST A FEW YEARS AGO,
CHASTAIN WAS ON NBC NEWS SAYING
THAT HEADINGWASSAFE FOR KIDS
AS LONG AS THEY WERE TRAINED
CORRECTLY.
>> IT'S A PART OF THE GAME, AND
I THINK IT'S AN IMPORTANT PART,
AND I THINK IT'S A BEAUTIFUL
PART OF THE GAME.
>> Reporter: YOU, AT THE TIME,
WERE SAYING, "I THINK THAT IT
CAN BE TAUGHT TO KIDS, AND IT
SHOULD STAY IN THE GAME FOR
KIDS."
NOW YOU THINK DIFFERENTLY.
I WONDER, WHAT WAS IT IN
PARTICULAR THAT CHANGED YOUR
MIND?
>> I THINK IT WAS HEARING THE
INFORMATION THAT DR. CANTU WAS
PUTTING OUT.
THE MORE I STARTED HEARING ABOUT
IT AND THE MORE RESEARCH THAT
HAS COME OUT, I JUST THOUGHT, I
HAVE TO PROTECT THEM.
AND I KNOW THAT SOCCER
DOESN'T... THAT DOESN'T NEED TO
EXIST AT THIS YOUNG AGE.
>> Reporter: CHASTAIN SAYS
TAKING HEADING OUT WON'T HURT
THE DEVELOPMENT OF YOUNG SOCCER
PLAYERS.
SHE SAYS THEY CAN STILL LEARN
THE TECHNIQUES USING SOFTER
BALLS AND THEN INTRODUCE IT BACK
INTO GAMES WHEN THEY'RE 14.
BUT SHE ADMITTED THAT SO FAR
THEIR CAMPAIGN REALLY HASN'T
TAKEN OFF.
JUST A HANDFUL OF SOCCER
PROGRAMS HAVE ACTUALLY REMOVED
HEADING.
SHE SAYS THE LEAD REALLY HAS TO
COME FROM THE TOP, FROM THE
INTERNATIONAL GOVERNING BODIES
OF SOCCER-- FIFA AND THE U.S.
SOCCER FEDERATION.
THOSE ORGANIZATIONS ARE
CURRENTLY BEING SUED BY A GROUP
OF SOCCER PARENTS IN CALIFORNIA
WHO SAY THEY HAVEN'T DONE ENOUGH
TO PROTECT KIDS FROM HEAD
INJURY.
WE REACHED OUT TO BOTH
ORGANIZATIONS WHO SAID THE
LITIGATION MADE IT HARD FOR THEM
TO COMMENT, BUT BOTH TOLD US
PLAYER SAFETY IS A PRIORITY.
AND U.S. SOCCER ALSO TOLD
NEWSHOUR THAT THEIR CONCUSSION
POLICIES ARE REGULARLY BEING
REVIEWED.
BACK IN NEW JERSEY, THE SOCCER
SEASON ROLLS ON.
WE SEE A FAIR AMOUNT OF HEADING,
ESPECIALLY IN MY OLDER SON
JACK'S GAMES.
THE BOYS TAKE HARD ONES, THEY
TAKE SOFT ONES, THEY SCORE GOALS
WITH THEM.
OUR SOCCER CLUB, MONTCLAIR
UNITED, SAYS IT'S VERY CONCERNED
ABOUT CONCUSSIONS AND TRAINS OUR
COACHES THOROUGHLY.
BUT THEY SAY THEY DON'T MAKE THE
RULES, AND SO HEADING REMAINS A
PART OF THE GAME.
BUT OUR PEDIATRICIAN, DR. FLYER,
SAYS TAKING HEADING OUT OF KIDS'
SOCCER DOESN'T GO FAR ENOUGH, IN
HIS OPINION.
HE SAYS WHAT HE'S SEEN IN HIS
OWN PATIENTS FOR THREE DECADES
IS EVIDENCE ENOUGH THAT THE
SPORT ISN'T SAFE FOR KIDS.
>> WE HAVE THIS 30-YEAR
EXPERIMENT.
YOU KNOW, THE RESULTS ARE COMING
IN.
IT'S NOT SAFE FOR CHILDREN TO DO
THIS.
IT'S A CONTACT SPORT THAT...
AND, YOU KNOW, THAT'S ALMOST A
EUPHEMISM NOW.
IT'S A BRAIN-INJURING SPORT.
AND IF I DON'T GET THIS
INFORMATION ACROSS, EVEN AT THE
RISK OF UPSETTING PEOPLE, I...
I'VE FAILED.
>> Reporter: SO, WHERE DOES ALL
THIS LEAVE US?
MY WIFE AND KIDS AND I STILL GET
UP EVERY SATURDAY AND SUNDAY AND
GET READY FOR ANOTHER LONG
WEEKEND OF SOCCER.
BUT AFTER ALL THE INTERVIEWS AND
RESEARCH I'VE DONE, TORY AND I
RECENTLY TOLD OUR KIDS NOT TO
HEAD THE BALL ANYMORE, NOT TILL
THEY'RE 14.
SO FAR, IT'S NOT BEEN AN ISSUE
IN THEIR GAMES OR WITH THEIR
COACHES.
AND SINCE THIS STORY FIRST AIRED
LAST FALL, OUR SOCCER CLUB HAS
UPDATED ITS POLICIES ON HEADING
AND HEAD INJURY.
THEY'RE NOW OFFERING FREE
BASELINE TESTING FOR ALL PLAYERS
SO THAT IF A KID DOES GET A
CONCUSSION, DOCTORS CAN KNOW HOW
SERIOUS IT IS AND TRACK THEIR
RECOVERY BETTER.
THEY'RE ALSO UPDATING HOW THEY
TEACH HEADING TECHNIQUES, USING
SOFTER BALLS FOR YOUNG KIDS AND
FOCUSING ON NECK STRENGTH.
DO YOU FEEL LIKE WE'RE DOING THE
RIGHT THING BY LETTING THEM
PLAY?
>> WE ARE SORT OF PUNTING THE
BALL DOWN THE FIELD AND AVOIDING
A DECISION, WHICH, IN AND OF
ITSELF, IS A DECISION.
OUR DECISION IS THAT WE'VE LET
OUR KIDS CONTINUE TO PLAY
SOCCER.
>> Reporter: AND ARE YOU OKAY
WITH THAT?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, I SORT OF
JUST SIT THERE SECRETLY HOPING
AT THE END OF EVERY GAME THAT
THEY WALK OFF THE FIELD IN ONE
PIECE.
I JUST WANT THEM TO BE WHOLE.
>> Sreenivasan: WANT TO KNOW
MORE ABOUT THE CONCUSSION RISKS
ASSOCIATED WITH YOUTH SPORTS?
READ OUR Q&A WITH ONE OF THE
NATION'S TOP NEUROSURGEONS
ONLINE AT www.pbs.org/newshour.
FINALLY TONIGHT, U.S.
IMMIGRATION OFFICIALS ARE MOVING
TO DEPORT AT LEAST 150 BOSNIANS
SUSPECTED OF COMMITTING WAR
CRIMES IN THE 1990s, ACCORDING
TO THE "NEW YORK TIMES."
INVESTIGATORS SAY AS MANY AS 600
IMMIGRANTS MAY HAVE CONCEALED
THEIR INVOLVEMENT IN ETHNIC
CLEANSING WHEN THEY FLED TO THE
U.S.
POLICE IN SPAIN SAY THEY'VE
BROKEN UP ON A COUNTERFEITING
RING THAT'S BEEN SELLING FAKE
WORKS BY PICASSO, WARHOL AND
MIRO FOR THE LAST SEVEN YEARS.
AUTHORITIES SEIZED 271
CANVASSES, SCULPTURES AND
DOCUMENTS, ALL SUSPECTED OF
BEING FORGERIES.
THANKS FOR WATCHING PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.